###### March 2015

\<div left 42% centeralign\>

```{=html}
<div>
```
[`{{:applications:fogwilletal2014.png?320 |}}`{=mediawiki}](http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jqs.2683)

```{=html}
</div>
```
Click the image to go to //Journal of Quaternary Science// page.

```{=html}
</div>
```
\<div right 50%\> \| **Testing the sensitivity of the East Antarctic
Ice Sheet to Southern Ocean dynamics: past changes and future
implications** \|\| \| **investigators**: \| [C.
Fogwill](http://www.bees.unsw.edu.au/chris-fogwill), C.
Turney, K. Meissner, N. Golledge, P. Spence, J. Roberts, M. England, R.
Jones, and L. Carter\| \| **journal**: \| [Journal of Quaternary
Science](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/journal/10.1002/(ISSN)1099-1417)
\|

The stability of the Antarctic ice sheet and its contribution to sea
level under projected future warming remains highly uncertain. The Last
Interglacial (LI; 135--116 ka ago) is a potential analogue for the
present period, with sea levels 6.6--9.4 m higher than present, and thus
it deserves study. This paper examines a possible source of LI sea-level
rise. These authors report on model simulations exploring the effects of
migrating Southern Hemisphere Westerlies (SHWs) on Southern Ocean
circulation and Antarctic ice-sheet dynamics. The effect on ice dynamics
is modeled with PISM, which plays only a supporting role in this work.
They conclude that southerly shifts in winds may have significantly
impacted the sub-polar gyres, inducing pervasive warming of 0.2--0.8 °C
in the upper 1200 m adjacent to sectors of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet
(EAIS). Thus the EAIS potentially made a substantial, hitherto
unsuspected, contribution to LI sea levels.

```{=html}
</div>
```
`<WRAP clear>`{=html}`</WRAP>`{=html}
