###### April 2016

\<div left 44%\>

[`{{:applications:ziemenetal2016.png?350|}}`{=mediawiki}](http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/jog.2016.13)

```{=html}
</div>
```
\<div right 50%\> \| **[Modeling the evolution of the Juneau Icefield
between 1971 and 2100 using the Parallel Ice Sheet Model
(PISM)](http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/jog.2016.13)** \|\| \|
**investigators**: \| [F.
Ziemen](http://www.mpimet.mpg.de/en/staff/florian-ziemen/),
R. Hock, A. Aschwanden, C. Khroulev, C. Kienholz, A. Melkonian, and J.
Zhang\| \| **journal**: \| [Journal of
Glaciology](http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayJournal?jid=JOG)
\|

The large icefields of North America are geometrically-complex. They are
exposed to heterogeneous climatic conditions. They are intermediate in
size between the individual mountain glaciers and ice sheets which are
common modeling targets. And thus they are a good test of the capability
and effectiveness of ice dynamics models.

This paper studies the 4000 km\^2 Juneau ice field straddling the
USA/Canada border using PISM. Perhaps it is no surprise that the modeled
outcome of a future warming scenario is (1) loss of much of the glacier
volume, and (2) strong dependence of the outcome on the precipitation
and surface mass balance inputs. Climatic observations are too sparse
and unrepresentative to allow use of interpolated values for climate
inputs, though this was attempted. Instead, atmospheric climate model
(20 km Weather Research and Forecasting Model) output was used.
Simulated and observed surface mass balance gave good agreement only
after precipitation adjustments to account for unresolved orographic
effects. Under a RCP6.0 emission scenario, the PISM results then project
a decrease in ice volume by 58--68% by 2099 compared with 2010. If the
modeled 2070--99 climate is held constant beyond 2099, the icefield is
eliminated by 2200. With constant 1971--2010 climate, the icefield
stabilizes at 86% of its present-day volume.

```{=html}
</div>
```
`<WRAP clear>`{=html}`</WRAP>`{=html}
