###### August 2017 {#august_2017}

\<div left 46%\>

[`{{:applications:macgregoretal2016.png?300|}}`{=mediawiki}](http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/2015JF003803)

```{=html}
</div>
```
\<div right 48%\> \| **[A synthesis of the basal thermal state of the
Greenland Ice
Sheet](http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/2015JF003803)** \|\| \|
**investigators**: \| [J.
MacGregor](https://science.gsfc.nasa.gov/sed/bio/joseph.a.macgregor)
and others \| \| **journal**: \| [J. Geophys. Res.: Earth
Surface](http://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/hub/jgr/journal/10.1002/(ISSN)2169-9011/)
\|

After the surface slope and the ice thickness, which determine the
effect of the body force of gravity (the driving stress), the basal
thermal state of an ice sheet is the most important boundary condition
determining the stresses on a flowing ice sheet. The basal thermal
regime is, however, the integrated effect of flow history. To model it
one must track viscous dissipation of flow, sliding friction, and
geothermal input, and compute the balance. Whether the balance is just
above (thawed, wet, and weak) or just below (frozen and strong) the
freezing point is then critical to dynamical boundary condition.

The thermal state can only be observed directly at boreholes, which are
few and biased toward cold, near-divide locations. To determine the
basal temperature and melt rates for the Greenland Ice Sheet (GrIS),
this paper combines a survey of observations, including borehole and
less-direct observations (surface velocity, surface texture, and
radiostratigraphy), with analysis of 3D thermomechanically-coupled model
results from eight different models, including PISM, which participated
in the SeaRISE assessment process. Such a synthesis has not been
attempted before. Its conclusions about the distribution of melting
conditions, such as the map at left, are much more likely to withstand
scientific scrutiny than any individual model results or point
measurements. The paper also delimits a specific large portion of GrIS,
about one third by area, where additional observations would most
improve knowledge of the basal thermal state.

```{=html}
</div>
```
`<WRAP clear>`{=html}`</WRAP>`{=html}
