---
title: PISM stable0.4 is released
---

PISM version *stable0.4* is available. See the *stable version page*
to check out a copy of the source code or download an Ubuntu package.
Send email to [help@pism-docs.org](mailto:{{ site.author.email }}) for
help with any version of PISM.

Changes (compared to *stable0.3*) include

## Model changes

* Merging with PISM-PIK:
   * SIA and SSA ice velocities are hybridized using simpler technique (Winkelmann et al. 2011).
   * Mass continuity finite difference scheme is conserving (Winkelmann et al. 2011).
   * Mass fluxes at calving fronts are accounted by subgrid scheme (Albrechts et al. 2011).
   * Calving model based on principle strain rates ("eigencalving"; Winkelmann et al. 2011).
* Improved enthalpy code (Aschwanden et al. 2011).
* In stable0.3 and 0.2, stored basal water was diffused in the horizontal (Bueler & Brown, 2009).  This regularization has been removed.  Instead water is stored locally and drains at a fixed, configurable rate.  Users/developers are encouraged to propose and implement alternative subglacial hydrology models.
* Implemented the bed roughness parameterization for SIA described by (Schoof, 2003).
* PDD code computes accumulation from precipitation and a temperature threshold.
* Temperature, precipitation, surface mass balance lapse rate corrections can modify surface inputs.

## Usability improvements/changes

* PISM stable0.4 requires PETSc version 3.0 or 3.1.  (Version 2.3.3 is not supported.)
* New CMake-based build system.
* Forcing by time- and space-dependent climate or surface boundary conditions: improved interface.
* Simplified flow-line modeling using PISM. See Storglaciaren example
  in the *User's Manual* (or see the *Storglaciaren page* for a
  preview).
* On Debian and Ubuntu systems PISM can be installed from a `.deb` package.  Download it *here*. **This is no longer the case.**
* Building development version of PISM on Debian systems is easier with the help of a meta-package depending on all necessary tools and libraries; see *dev version page*.
* Model state is backed-up every wall-clock hour to make it easier to re-start interrupted runs.
* PDD code reports melt, accumulation and runoff.
* Updated documentation, including User's Manual, Installation Manual, and Source Code Browser.

## Under the hood

* Better software tests.
* Less restrictive input file format means easier to create a PISM-readable NetCDF file.
* Improved file output performance and choice of variable order.
* Many structural improvements:
   * re-factored stress balance code
   * re-factored flow laws
   * well-defined climate forcing
   * well-defined "diagnostic" computations
   * isolated bedrock thermal layer model, with clear interface
* More flexible climate forcing using scalar temperature offsets
* Clearly-identified ice surface inputs will accept output from a snow/firn model.

## Experimental features

* Finite-element-based SSA solver.
   * Designed for use with inverse modeling codes that are not a part of this release.
* Preliminary regional (outlet glacier) modeling support.
* Mostly untested coupling to external energy balance/surface mass balance models.

