---
title: PISM stable0.5 is released
---

See the [stable version page](https://github.com/pism/pism/) to check out a
copy of the PISM `stable0.5` source code. If you have already checked
out the prerelease version, just do '' "git pull" '' and then ''
"make install" '' in your build directory. Send email to
[help@pism-docs.org](mailto:uaf-pism@alaska.edu) for help with any
version of PISM. See also [slides introducing
stable0.5](https://github.com/pism/uaf-iceflow/raw/gh-pages/bueler-hamburg.pdf)
at the European PISM workshop, Hamburg, Germany, May 2012.

Changes compared to `stable0.4` include

## Most-significant changes

* Added regional modeling executable `pismo` and Python drainage-basin tools `regional-tools`.
* Added Jakobshavn outlet glacier model example.  See the *User's Manual*.
* Separate documentation of climate forcing options in the new PDF *PISM's climate forcing components* manual.
* Consistent command-line options for climate forcing, based on improvements to climate forcing code and its interface.
* Separated flow laws used in SIA and SSA code, and thus separated enhancement factors.  New command-line options (`-sia_e`, `-ssa_e`) and configuration parameters (`sia_enhancement_factor`, `ssa_enhancement_factor`).
* `-pdd_annualize` implemented.  This is recommended for degree-day melting scheme usage.
* Reported rates of change are computed as average rates over reporting intervals, by differencing cumulative quantities.
* Removed the `pgrn` executable and the EISMINT-Greenland example.  All Greenland examples now use standard executable `pismr`.  The documented SeaRISE-Greenland and Jakobshavn examples both use modern data, and fully-replace the old version.
* Similarly, removed the EISMINT-Ross example and the `pross` executable.  Replaced by improved, modern example using ALBMAP and MEASURES data.  See the *User's Manual*.
* Now using NetCDF4 so big files can be written (see [this news item](news:first1km)).  New output format options `-o_format [netcdf4_parallel, pnetcdf]`.
* Moved source code hosting and bugs/issues to [github.com](https://github.com/pism/pism).
` Switched to [PETSc 3.2](http://www.mcs.anl.gov/petsc/).

## More usability improvements and changes

* Implemented `-o_order [xyz, yxz, zyx]`; the first one is fastest.
* Implemented `-e_age_coupling`.
* Sliding model option `-topg_to_phi` now it takes 4 numbers (no special value in the ocean).
* Time-series flush whenever `-extra_files` are written.
* Model time in output files is in seconds.
* PISM uses time bounds, both in reporting code and code using forcing data.
* Reporting for both scalar and spatial time-series: daily, monthly, yearly.

## Under the hood

* Improved the `IceFlowLaw` class by moving physical constants out of it.
* Improved the implementation of PISM's basal yield stress model.
* Improved regridding code.
* Implemented temperature-dependent conductivity and specific heat capacity of ice.
* Added support for the Gregorian calendar.
* PISM uses Proj4 to compute latitudes, longitudes, and cell areas.

