---
title: PISM 2.1 is out
---

We are pleased to announce the release of PISM v2.1.

## Notable changes compared to v2.0

Some of these were included in 2.0.x bug fix releases.

### Mass transport

- Added a flux limiter that ensures strict preservation of non-negativity of ice thickness
  and therefore mass conservation up to rounding error.

  This is a Zalesak-style limiter described in

  P. K. Smolarkiewicz, “Comment on “A Positive Definite Advection Scheme Obtained by
  Nonlinear Renormalization of the Advective Fluxes”,” Monthly Weather Review, vol. 117,
  no. 11, pp. 2626–2632, 1989, doi:
  [10.1175/1520-0493(1989)117<2626:COPDAS>2.0.CO;2](https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0493(1989)117<2626:COPDAS>2.0.CO;2).

  Note that this approach (unlike modifications of the discretization of SIA diffusivity
  in the Jarosch et al. paper mentioned below) works with *all* stress balance models.

- [Implemented a
  benchmark](https://github.com/pism/pism/blob/v2.1/examples/bedrock_step/README.md)
  verifying mass conservation in an "isothermal SIA + mass continuity" setup with "rough"
  bed topography.

  This benchmark is described in

  A. H. Jarosch, C. G. Schoof, and F. S. Anslow, “Restoring mass conservation to shallow
  ice flow models over complex terrain,” The Cryosphere, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 229–240, Feb.
  2013, doi: [10.5194/tc-7-229-2013](https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-7-229-2013).

### Isochrone tracing

- Implemented an [isochronal layer tracing
  scheme](https://www.pism.io/docs/manual/modeling-choices/dynamics/age.html#isochronal-layer-tracing)
  (see A. Born and A. Robinson, "Modeling the Greenland englacial stratigraphy," The
  Cryosphere, vol. 15, no. 9, pp. 4539-4556, 2021, doi:
  [10.5194/tc-15-4539-2021](https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-15-4539-2021).)

### Surface processes

- Implemented the [diurnal energy balance model
  dEBM-simple](https://www.pism.io/docs/climate_forcing/surface.html#diurnal-energy-balance-model-debm-simple)
  (see M. Zeitz, R. Reese, J. Beckmann, U. Krebs-Kanzow, and R. Winkelmann, "Impact of the
  melt-albedo feedback on the future evolution of the Greenland Ice Sheet with
  PISM-dEBM-simple," The Cryosphere, vol. 15, no. 12, pp. 5739-5764, Dec. 2021, doi:
  [10.5194/tc-15-5739-2021](https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-15-5739-2021).)

### Atmosphere forcing

- Added support for 2D precipitation offsets in `-atmosphere ...,delta_P`. If the input
  file set using `atmosphere.delta_P.file` contains a scalar time series `delta_P`, use
  that as a time-dependent constant-in-space forcing. If the input file contains a 2D
  variable `delta_P`, use that as a time-and-space-dependent forcing.
- Added support for 2D air temperature offsets in `-atmosphere ...,delta_T`. If the input
  file set using `atmosphere.delta_T.file` contains a scalar time series `delta_T`, use
  that as a time-dependent constant-in-space forcing. If the input file contains a 2D
  variable `delta_T`, use that as a time-and-space-dependent forcing.
- Added support for piecewise-constant temporal interpolation of near-surface air
  temperatures in `-atmosphere given`: set
  `atmosphere.given.air_temperature_interpolation` to `piecewise_constant`.

### Ocean forcing

- Added the ability to use ocean model components implemented in Python (see
  [`examples/python/pism.py`](https://github.com/pism/pism/blob/v2.1/examples/python/pism.py))

### Calving

- Fixed a bug reported by Christian Rodehacke: calving mechanisms should not remove ice at
  ice fronts adjacent to isolated patches of ice-free water (see [issue
  #521](https://github.com/pism/pism/issues/521)).

### Stress balance

- Improved the initial guess of sliding velocity used when the ice front advances by
  extrapolating velocity computed by the `SSAFD` solver during the previous time step (set
  `stress_balance.ssa.fd.extrapolate_at_margins` to `false` to disable).

### Energy conservation

- PISM no longer attempts to correct energy conservation by freezing basal water.

  At each time step PISM checks basal enthalpy and if necessary modifies it to ensure
  continuity of temperature in each `bedrock+ice` column. Sometimes this modification
  creates energy; prior to this change PISM attempted to remove an equivalent amount of
  energy by modifying the basal melt rate to freeze water stored at the base.

  Under some conditions this basal melt rate adjustment *created mass* by freezing more
  water than available and even led to crashes with error messages stating that ice
  thickness exceeds `Lz`.

### Input and output, diagnostics

- Added diagnostics `tendency_of_ice_{amount,mass}_due_to_frontal_melt` and
  `tendency_of_ice_{amount,mass}_due_to_forced_retreat`. Renamed diagnostic
  `max_sliding_vel` to `max_horizontal_vel`.

### Bug fixes

- Added time bounds to scalar forcing files in
  [`examples/std-greenland`](https://github.com/pism/pism/tree/v2.1/examples/std-greenland).
- Fixed a bug in the code ensuring non-negativity of ice thickness. (The old code added
  too much ice in an attempt to ensure non-negativity -- so much so that sometimes this
  caused crashes with error messages stating that ice thickness exceeds `Lz`.)

  Note that this "projection step" (`ice_thickness = max(tentative_ice_thickness, 0)`)
  should have no effect now: the flux limiter mentioned above is designed to ensure
  non-negativity. We keep this step, however, to maintain the ability to keep track of ice
  thickness changes due to conservation errors (if they ever happen).
- Fixed bugs in scalar diagnostics `ice_volume_cold` and `ice_volume_temperate`.
- Use CF-compliant units "`common_years`" in forcing files.

### Other

- Added [CITATION.cff](https://github.com/pism/pism/blob/v2.1/CITATION.cff) to properly
  acknowledge all contributions and to make it easier to cite PISM.
- Implemented UNO2, UNO3 and a couple of related transport methods (not used, but
  available for future use; see J.-G. Li, "Upstream Nonoscillatory Advection Schemes,"
  Monthly Weather Review, vol. 136, no. 12, pp. 4709-4729, Dec. 2008, doi:
  [10.1175/2008mwr2451.1](https://doi.org/10.1175/2008mwr2451.1).).
- Use `realpath()` to resolve relative file names. Now configuration parameters ending in
  `.file`, when saved to output files and in PISM output to `stdout`, contain *absolute*
  file names. This will make it easier to reproduce runs based on an output file.
- Added support for checkpointing the HTCondor way (see commit
  [3740c41df](https://github.com/pism/pism/commit/3740c41df6f35fdf0d7501f96f5cab362f25a24b)).
- Use `-list_diagnostics all` to print the list of all diagnostics, `-list_diagnostics
  spatial` for 2D and 3D variables, and `-list_diagnostics scalar` for scalar time series.
- Added code to generate `pism.pc` and `pismicebin.pc` for use with `pkg-config`. This
  will make it easier to use PISM as a library (to couple to a GCM, for example).
- PISM's build system uses `pkg-config` to look for some of the required libraries.
- Refactored utility classes used to store 2D and 3D arrays.
- Replaced `examples/searise-antarctica` with `examples/antarctica` based on [ALBMAP
  v1](https://doi.org/10.1594/PANGAEA.734145) data. This avoids a dependency on [SeaRISE
  data](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10140224) formerly hosted by the University of
  Montana.
