---
title: Job Offer: Scientist for Modeling Ice Sheet–Climate Interaction at DMI

---
The Danish Meteorological Institute (DMI), a leading research institution in climate and ice sheet modelling research, is offering a 3-year, full-time position as a Scientist for Modelling Ice Sheet–Climate Interaction.
Summary of the job advertisement
As our new colleague, you will work with our Earth system model that includes ice sheets as interacting components in both hemispheres. Your responsibilities will include designing and executing model experiments, improving the model code, and enhancing the coupling between climate and ice sheets. You will collaborate with colleagues at DMI and participate in international consortia. Additionally, you will analyze modelled climate outputs, lead and contribute to scientific papers, and participate in developing grant applications with our team and external collaborators.
Please use the following link for the complete job announcement and to apply for this position: https://candidate.hr-manager.net/ApplicationInit.aspx?cid=5001&ProjectId=187331&DepartmentId=6145&MediaId=5.
The current dateline is Sunday, the 30th of March.
For further details or questions about the position, please contact Christian Rodehacke at [telephone:] +45 3915 7453 or via mail at cr@dmi.dk. Alternatively, contact our acting Head of Unit, Mark R. Payne, at [telephone:] +45 2179 2620.


## Summary 

Are you interested in working with climate and ice sheet models? And motivated by understanding climate change in the Arctic and Antarctic regions? Here is a great opportunity to join DMI’s skilled team of climate researchers at the National Center for Climate Research.

The Danish Meteorological Institute (DMI) opens a 3 year, full-time position for a scientist to work on climate modeling with a focus on the polar regions and how the climate affects the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets and vice versa.

 

## About the job

As our new colleague, you will work with our earth system model containing ice sheets in both hemispheres as interacting components: our comprehensive global earth system model EC-Earth, the Parallel Ice Sheet Model (PISM), and our surface mass balance model CISSEMBEL. You will be designing and executing model experiments and developing and improving the model code and climate-ice sheet coupling in collaboration with colleagues at DMI and as part of international consortia. You will also work with analyses of the modeled climate outputs, lead and contribute to scientific papers, and participate in developing new grant applications with the group and external collaborators. While working with the models and developing an improved coupling will be a core task, there will be some flexibility in deciding the weight between working with the model, running and analyzing experiments, and which particular topics and projects you work on.

Polar research is a key research area in the National Center for Climate Research (NCKF), and our work is carried out in close collaboration with national and international partners (e.g., through EU Horizon projects such as PROTECT and PolarRES). As part of NCKF, you will work in a department with a strong profile in both global and regional climate modeling, as well as remote sensing. The position in the framework of the Horizon Europe project “LIQUIDICE” collaborates with sister projects “ICELINK” and “CRYOSCOPE.”

 

## About you

We are looking for a candidate with the following qualifications and experience: 

- A PhD degree in climate science, meteorology, oceanography, glaciology, or related fields (e.g., physics or engineering)
- Experience with modeling, preferably of the ocean, atmosphere, or ice sheets (e.g. global or regional atmospheric or ocean modeling, numerical weather prediction, Earth system modeling, surface mass balance or ice sheet modeling)
- Advanced programming skills (under Linux/Unix, scripting languages, e.g. Python or bash, high-level languages, e.g. Fortran or C++, etc.) and experience with HPC systems
- Research experience working with polar (Arctic or Antarctic) climate is an advantage
- Good communication skills in oral and written English
 

## About the National Centre for Climate Research

The position is in the Danish National Center for Climate Research (NCKF) at DMI, which employs more than 70 climate scientists, including PhD students, junior and senior scientists. The companion Weather Research department employs researchers working with meteorology, oceanography and hydrology. We have a strong international profile, which is also reflected in the many nationalities employed and in the use of both English and Danish as working languages.

NCKF has been established with the purpose to conduct critical climate research for the Kingdom of Denmark (Denmark, Greenland and the Faroe Islands) and bring together climate knowledge, to form the basis for green transition and climate adaptation. The activities include assessments of observed and future climate change of the physical climate system, with focus on the Polar regions and on extreme weather and sea level around Denmark. Across the department, climate research builds on both global and regional modeling as well as observations from remote sensing, in-situ measurements and field work. NCKF also develops the Danish Climate Atlas (Klimaatlas) which contains detailed data about expected future changes in the climate of Denmark.

 

## About DMI 

DMI is part of the Ministry of Climate, Energy and Utilities. DMI is the government's climate science advisor, creating and communicating knowledge about weather, climate and the sea to the Danish Realm. DMI's warnings, weather forecasts and services safeguard life and infrastructure and provide a basis for planning in a changing climate. As an authority on weather, climate and the sea, DMI provides meteorological services to the Danish defence, emergency preparedness as well as civil aviation and shipping in Denmark and Greenland. DMI is one of the oldest state institutions in Denmark and celebrated its 150th anniversary in 2022.

We have approximately 400 employees, most of whom work at DMI’s new headquarters at Sankt Kjelds Gård in Østerbro. The new place have interior design that allows for an activity-based way of working.

 

## Employment and Salary

Will be according to the Danish Law and Agreements. It will be possible to apply for an addition to the basic salary. DMI offers a flexible working week of 37 hours including a paid lunch break, and six weeks of paid vacation annually. If you come from abroad, there is a possibility for a reduced tax scheme the first 7 years.  

For further details about the position, contact Christian Rodehacke (telephone: +45 3915 7453, mail cr@dmi.dk) or acting Head of Unit Mark R. Payne (telephone: +45 2179 2620).

At DMI, diversity is an important value for us, because we believe that an inclusive and versatile work environment strengthens task fulfilment. We work actively with diversity in our employee composition, which is reflected in our inclusive workplace with a balance between work life and family life. We encourage everyone to apply for the position regardless of age, gender, sexuality, religion or ethnicity.

 

## Application

Send your motivated cover letter and a curriculum vitae, so we have it no later than Sunday the 30th of March. We expect to conduct interviews during weeks 14-15. The invitation will be sent via email.
