---
title: PISM 2.2 is out
---

We are pleased to announce the release of PISM v2.2.

## Notable changes compared to v2.1

- All executables and scripts installed in the [bin]{.title-ref}
  sub-directory of PISM\'s installation location start with \"pism\" to
  make it easier to recognize ones that belong to PISM, especially when
  using a [.deb]{.title-ref} package to install it.
- Rename the [pismr]{.title-ref} executable to [pism]{.title-ref}.
- Remove the [pismv]{.title-ref} executable. Use [pism -test
  X]{.title-ref} to run a verification test [X]{.title-ref}.
- Add some automatic testing on macOS.
- Use [pkg-config]{.title-ref} to look for all the dependencies that
  support it.
- Add the CMake flag [Pism_PKG_CONFIG_STATIC]{.title-ref} to tell CMake
  to use the [\--static]{.title-ref} flag when using
  [pkg-config]{.title-ref}. See [issue
  529](https://github.com/pism/pism/issues/529).
- Add [VERSION]{.title-ref} to ensure that tarballs with PISM\'s sources
  (e.g. archived by Zenodo) contain appropriate version info.
- Update some examples in [examples/marine]{.title-ref}.
- Fix an bug reported by Ken Mankoff: scripts in
  [examples/antarctica/]{.title-ref} required PISM built with PROJ.
- Add a section about citing PISM to the manual; remove redundant and
  possibly inconsistent recommendations elsewhere in PISM\'s docs.
- Add a section about publishing PISM results to the manual. This
  section covers archiving the code, model inputs and outputs, etc.
- Add the configuration parameter [energy.model]{.title-ref} (choices:
  [none]{.title-ref}, [cold]{.title-ref}, [enthalpy]{.title-ref});
  remove [energy.enabled]{.title-ref} and
  [energy.temperature_based]{.title-ref}.
- All bed deformation models use the load averaged over the duration of
  the (usually long) bed deformation time step (see [issue
  525](https://github.com/pism/pism/issues/525)). This requires saving
  the time integral of the load since the last bed deformation update
  (variable [bed_def_load_accumulator]{.title-ref} and the time of the
  last update [time_bed_deformation]{.title-ref}) as a part of the model
  state and reading them when re-starting the model. Rename
  [bed_deformation.lc.update_interval]{.title-ref} to
  [bed_deformation.update_interval]{.title-ref} since now *all* bed
  deformation models use this parameter. Add a new diagnostic variable:
  [bed_def_load]{.title-ref}, the load used during the last bed
  deformation update.
- Replace the serial connected component labeling algorithm with a
  parallel version (see [pull request
  547](https://github.com/pism/pism/pull/547) for details). This should
  improve strong scaling of the ocean model PICO and (less noticeably)
  of some other PISM components.
- Require CMake 3.16 or newer.
- Support the current PETSc version (3.22).
- Update the oldest supported PETSc version from 3.7 to 3.11. (PISM\'s
  code still works with PETSc 3.7 and newer, but testing with PETSc
  older than 3.11 requires Python 2.7.x, which is no longer supported.)
- Refactor the SSAFD solver, adding the ability to use PETSc\'s
  infrastructure to manage Picard iterations (and even use Newton
  iterations with a finite difference approximation of the Jacobian
  computed using coloring). Unfortunately this approach appears to be
  more fragile than the old one, so the default solver implementation
  remains the same. On the plus side, we get the ability to compute and
  save the SSAFD residual, which may help one analyze the quality of a
  velocity approximation produced by the SSAFD solver.
- Create a Debian (Ubuntu) PISM package. This work required a number of
  changes to follow best practices when installing software in a
  standard location. For example: Python scripts in [util/]{.title-ref}
  are installed in [/usr/share/pism/bin]{.title-ref}.
- Add a configuration flag
  [stress_balance.ssa.fd.upstream_surface_slope_approximation]{.title-ref}.
  If \"yes\" (the default), use the first order \"upstream\" (more
  accurately: \"uphill\") biased FD approximation. This reduces
  oscillations of velocity approximations produced by SSAFD in areas
  where the surface slope is large (e.g. near the grounding line).
- Add a new diagnostic quantity:
  [ice_mass_transport_across_grounding_line]{.title-ref} (in
  [Gt/year]{.title-ref}). This quantity is similar to the 2D
  [grounding_line_flux]{.title-ref}, but designed to be easily
  comparable to [tendency_of_ice_mass_due_to_discharge]{.title-ref} and
  similar.
- Use \"kelvin\" (lowercase \"k\") in all temperature units and
  implement other similar changes to make PISM output files compatible
  with conventions used by [xarray]{.title-ref}.
- Add flexible re-projection and interpolation (including conservative
  interpolation) using
  [YAC](https://dkrz-sw.gitlab-pages.dkrz.de/yac/index.html). This work
  makes it possible to set up a PISM simulation using a grid in one
  projection and read inputs from NetCDF files that use *different*
  grids and projections (with some limitations). This should reduce the
  amount of pre-processing needed to use bed topography data sets (such
  as BedMachine), regional climate model outputs, etc.
- Improve support for coordinate reference system specification
  following Climate and Forecasting conventions.
- Add the configuration parameter [grid.file]{.title-ref} and remove
  options [-x_range]{.title-ref}, [-y_range]{.title-ref} and
  [-refinement_factor]{.title-ref}. The parameter
  [grid.file]{.title-ref} specifies the *grid definition file* used to
  set the coordinate reference system plus default domain and grid
  sizes. See the manual for details.
- Add configuration parameters [grid.dx]{.title-ref} and
  [grid.dy]{.title-ref} (command line options [-dx]{.title-ref} and
  [-dy]{.title-ref}). These parameters allow users to set the domain
  size and location (using the input file, [grid.file]{.title-ref} or
  [grid.Lx]{.title-ref} and [grid.Ly]{.title-ref}) and then select the
  grid resolution to use on this domain. Note that [grid.dx]{.title-ref}
  and [grid.dy]{.title-ref} are in meters, but PISM will automatically
  convert to meters from units specified using command line options,
  e.g. [-dx 5km]{.title-ref}. Domain half widths [Lx]{.title-ref} and
  [Ly]{.title-ref} are re-computed to ensure that PISM uses exactly the
  requested grid resolution (this may slightly reduce the domain size
  compared to [Lx]{.title-ref} and [Ly]{.title-ref} provided by the
  user).

\- Remove support for NCAR\'s ParallelIO library since (as far as we
know) no one uses it.

