##### Postdoc for ESM/PISM modeler (MPI-M Hamburg) {#postdoc_for_esmpism_modeler_mpi_m_hamburg}

//This is a re-posting of the [CRYOLIST
announcement](http://lists.cryolist.org/pipermail/cryolist-cryolist.org/2015-August/000262.html)
from Uwe Mikolajewicz//

The Max Planck Institute for Meteorology (MPI-M) is a multidisciplinary
center for climate and Earth system research located in Hamburg,
Germany. MPI-M contributes to the BMBF project \"From the Last
Interglacial to the Anthropocene: Modeling a Complete Glacial Cycle\"
(PalMod), which aims at simulating the climate from the peak of the last
interglacial up to the present using comprehensive Earth System Models.

With respect to this research project, we have an open position for a

#### Postdoctoral Scientist (m/f, Ref. MPIM-W009) {#postdoctoral_scientist_mf_ref._mpim_w009}

The successful candidate will be part of a local team performing and
analyzing transient simulations from the last Glacial to the Holocene
with an interactively coupled atmosphere-ocean-ice sheet model.
Additionally the candidate will contribute to the development of this
model. The model system will consist of the MPI-Earth system model and
the ice sheet model PISM.

### Requirements

` * A PhD in oceanography/meteorology/physics or a related science.`\
` * Experience in performing and analyzing experiments with a comprehensive earth system model or ice sheet model;`\
` * Strong motivation and ability to carry out model development in an interdisciplinary and international environment;`\
` * Ability and desire to work in a closely cooperating team;`\
` * Excellent communication skills and publication record;`\
` * Familiarity with coding and running computer models, very good programming skills in FORTRAN (on a Linux platform) and scripting;`\
` * Knowledge of the MPI-Earth system model or the ice sheet model PISM would be of advantage.`

++++ more details \|

Employment conditions

` * The position is initially offered for up to four years starting at November 1, 2015 or later.`\
` * Payment will be in accordance with German public service positions (TVoeD E14), including extensive social security plans. The conditions of employment, including upgrades and duration, follow the rules of the Max Planck Society for the Advancement of Sciences and those of the German civil service.`\
` * The Max Planck Institute for Meteorology seeks to increase the number of female scientist and encourages them to apply. Handicapped persons with comparable qualifications receive preferential status.`

Selection criteria

Candidates will be evaluated based on their qualifications and ability
to fulfill the responsibilities as outlined for this project.

How to submit your application for this post

Please submit:

` - A cover letter`\
` - A detailed curriculum vitae`\
` - The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of two references `

by uploading the documents in our online Webtool:

<https://s-lotus.gwdg.de/mpg/mhmt/perso/mpim_w009.nsf/application>

Deadline for applying

This vacancy has been opened 17 August 2015. A first cut-off date for
the collection of the applications is foreseen on 20 September 2015. If
the position is not filled, this vacancy announcement will be
re-published indicating a second cut-off date.

Further information on this position

For further information, please contact Uwe Mikolajewicz
(uwe.mikolajewicz(at)mpimet.mpg.de). Do not forward your application to
this email address, the applications need to be submitted through the
online Webtool (see link above). ++++

##### Additional PhD Fellowships {#additional_phd_fellowships}

For information on PhD Fellowships in Earth System Modeling at MPI-M,
see

<http://lists.cryolist.org/pipermail/cryolist-cryolist.org/2015-August/000287.html>
